---
layout: post
title: "November'24 Updates"
description: "App Manager December update: Upcoming v4.0.0 stable release planned with interim v3.1.8 fixing app suspend issues; investigation into APK parsing failures caused by non-standard zip metadata and binary XML headers; experimental Finder feature launched with future filtering enhancements; UI improvements for 1-click Ops in progress; planned ADB connection troubleshooting tools to assist users and encourage community support for the open-source ADB library."
date: 2024-12-07T22:42:00-07:00
tags: app_manager
---

1. If everything goes as planned, the v4.0.0 stable release will be made at the end of this month (December). But before that v3.1.8 will be released for the current stable users who aren’t able to suspend/unsuspend apps in v3.1.7.
2. Some users are reporting that they cannot install a few modded apps with App Manager because it fails to parse the APK files. There could be many reasons for this. For example, App Manager uses the standard zip library to read any APK files (since they are simply zip files). A zip file stores a lot of metadata apart from the file themselves to enable a zip file reader to understand what the zip file contains and how they contain. However, Android framework implementation of APK file reader disregards some of those information while reading an APK file. A clever developer can actually exploit this to create a zip file with invalid metadata, thus, making it impossible for a typical zip file viewer to extract those files. One way to mitigate this is to modify the metadata on the fly before parsing it using a zip file reader which I am currently looking into. Another example is the use of non-standard headers. A typical Android binary XML (not to be confused with ABX format introduced in Android 12) reader expects the binary to be formatted in a certain way which, unfortunately, is not how Android framework reads an Android binary XML. This allows a clever developer to inject those non-standard header, thus, rendering the reader useless. In App Manager, we use ARSCLib for this which is known to have such issues.
3. Some debug build users are complaining that the new Finder feature is great, but they cannot actually do anything with it other than listing the apps. Note that the feature is highly experimental, and I have a few exciting plans for the feature. For example, the filtering rules that you apply in Finder may actually be reused in other places such as in the main page and for profiles. More details will be available as the feature matures.
4. As I have started working on the app actions (that Autostarts support), I have realized that some features in the 1-click Ops page needs better UI to select and manage the search results. Such improvements will be gradually made in the future.
5. Many people have faced problems in connecting to ADB. I’ll add some troubleshooting options in the future to better assist you with those problems. While I admit that my solution to the ADB is not perfect (partly due to lack of time and resource), the library I developed for this project is currently the only free and open source solution that works on Android devices. So, if you want that your problems be solved, it’s better if you can assist me in troubleshooting the problems. This will not only be beneficial to App Manager, but also to other projects that utilize the library.
