---
layout: post
title: "May'25 Updates"
description: "Reflect on years of experience across diverse communities including Hackintosh and Chrome OS on App Manager's fifth anniversary; fixing critical search/filter bug in v4.0.4; welcoming Shizuku’s recent shift to full open source and exploring potential integration."
date: 2025-05-31T22:39:00-07:00
tags: app_manager
---

It's been five years since I've started developing App Manager, and it's been an interesting experience. I've been part of a lot of communities before this, but Android community is probably the most diverse community so far. In Hackintosh community, for example, most people were highly technical, because you needed to know a lot about the hardware in order to build a hackintosh. It was particularly challenging for laptops since most of the hardware (e.g., PCI(e) devices) cannot be replaced unlike, say a desktop. With the introduction of Clover, and then [OpenCore](https://github.com/acidanthera/OpenCorePkg), the complexity has been greatly reduced, but it's still challenging to work with a laptop, especially with the newer graphics cards which aren't even support by the recent version of macOS (but some people are trying to find workaround). Anyway, the amount of dedication displayed by the hackintosh community is really impressive, and it's also a showcase of how resilient software engineers can be when they encounter challenges. Then there was also the Croissant project (which has been renamed to something else that I have forgotten about) where I have made some initial contributions, but Chrome OS itself is a dead end, and Google knows it very well. The experiences I've gathered from these two communities, in particular, have largely enhanced my ability to sustain an open source project. My inspiration for documentation, for example, is the OpenCore project.

App Manager v4.0.3 had a terrible bug that caused App Manager to crash or freeze (depending on device/OS) if certain keywords are used during searching/filtering. The issue has been addressed in v4.0.4. Interestingly, this has resulted in the creation of [29 duplicate issues](https://github.com/MuntashirAkon/AppManager/issues/1605) (so far). This demonstrates how important it is to look for similar issues before opening a new issue, or GitHub suggesting similar issue based on the title or issue content while the user is creating a new issue (similar to what we already have in many other websites). GitHub also has a terrible search option that tends to ignore older issues.

Shizuku has recently [altered its license terms](https://github.com/RikkaApps/Shizuku/commit/7bd50a24189446114d2fd669842bbdc720411142) to make the project completely open source (as opposed to source available that it previously was). I absolutely welcome this change and thank [vvb2060](https://github.com/vvb2060) for making this change. Some of you may now ask whether I've got any plan on supporting Shizuku. Let me explain this a bit.

Since v4.0.0, much of the compatibility layers in App Manager have been rewritten to allow a certain level of flexibility in terms of the mode of operations. From v4.0.1, it is also possible to alter the mode of operation to any UID of your choice provided they support reading and executing the start command. It is even possible albeit with certain modifications to run App Manager as a system app with permission whitelists or as a system level UID (latter is too risky). So, in a way, it is now possible to add Shizuku support in App Manager. At this point, I may need to spend some time with their API to understand how it works. My expectation would be a generic API (similar to [Open KeyChain](https://github.com/open-keychain/openpgp-api)'s) that would allow connecting to any Shizuku-style applications, including any future Shizuku forks (since it is open source now) instead of Shizuku "official" app alone.

Lastly, Eid Mubarak to those who celebrate Eid-ul Adha.